                                           A picture of the National Audit Office logo




Report
by the Comptroller
and Auditor General




Department of Health




Investigation: WannaCry
cyber attack and the NHS




HC 414 SESSION 2017–2019   25 APRIL 2018
4 What this investigation is about Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS




                          What this investigation is about


                          1     On Friday 12 May 2017 a global ransomware attack, known as WannaCry, affected
                          more than 200,000 computers in at least 100 countries. In the UK, the attack particularly
                          affected the NHS, although it was not the specific target. At 4 pm on 12 May, NHS England
                          declared the cyber attack a major incident and implemented its emergency arrangements
                          to maintain health and patient care. On the evening of 12 May a cyber‑security researcher
                          activated a kill-switch so that WannaCry stopped locking devices.

                          2    According to NHS England, the WannaCry ransomware affected at least 80 out of
                          the 236 trusts across England, because they were either infected by the ransomware or
                          turned off their devices or systems as a precaution. A further 603 primary care and other
                          NHS organisations were also infected, including 595 GP practices.

                          3     Before the WannaCry attack the Department of Health (the Department) and its
                          arm’s-length bodies had work under way to strengthen cyber-security in the NHS. For
                          example, NHS Digital was broadcasting alerts about cyber threats, providing a hotline
                          for dealing with incidents, sharing best practice and carrying out on-site assessments to
                          help protect against future cyber attacks; and NHS England had embedded the 10 Data
                          Security Standards (recommended by the National Data Guardian) in the standard NHS
                          contract for 2017-18 and was providing training to its Board and local teams to raise
                          awareness of cyber threats. In light of the WannaCry attack, the Department announced
                          further plans to strengthen NHS organisations’ cyber-security.

                          4     Our investigation focuses on events immediately before 12 May 2017 and up
                          until 30 September 2017. We only cover the effect the WannaCry attack had on the
                          NHS in England. We do not cover how the WannaCry attack affected other countries
                          or organisations outside the NHS. A cyber attack on either the health or social care
                          sectors could cause disruption across the whole health and social care sector. For
                          example, the Care Quality Commission (CQC) told us that, as some trusts were unable
                          to communicate with social services, there could have been delays in the discharge
                          of patients from hospital to social care, although the CQC relayed advice from NHS
                          Digital and NHS England to social care providers to help manage any disruption.
                          This investigation sets out the facts about:

                          •     the ransomware attack’s impact on the NHS and its patients;

                          •     why some parts of the NHS were affected; and

                          •     how the Department and NHS national bodies responded to the attack.
                             Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS Summary 5




Summary


1    The WannaCry attack affected NHS services in the week from 12 May to 19 May 2017.
The Department of Health (the Department) and NHS England worked with NHS Digital,
NHS Improvement, the National Cyber Security Centre, the National Crime Agency and
others to respond to the attack.


Key findings

The risk of a cyber attack affecting the NHS
2     WannaCry was the largest cyber attack to affect the NHS, although individual
trusts had been attacked before 12 May 2017. For example, two of the trusts infected
by WannaCry had been infected by previous cyber attacks. One of England’s biggest
trusts, Barts Health NHS Trust, had been infected before, and Northern Lincolnshire and
Goole NHS Foundation Trust had been subject to a ransomware attack in October 2016,
leading to the cancellation of 2,800 appointments (paragraph 3.7 and Figure 5).

3     The Department was warned about the risks of cyber attacks on the
NHS a year before WannaCry and although it had work under way it did not
formally respond with a written report until July 2017. The Secretary of State for
Health asked the National Data Guardian and the Care Quality Commission (CQC) to
undertake reviews of data security. These reports were published in July 2016 and
warned the Department that cyber attacks could lead to patient information being
lost or compromised and jeopardise access to critical patient record systems. They
recommended that all health and care organisations needed to provide evidence that
they were taking action to improve cyber-security, including moving off old operating
systems. Although the Department and its arm’s-length bodies had work under way to
improve cyber-security in the NHS, the Department did not publish its formal response
to the recommendations until July 2017 (paragraphs 3.6 and 3.11).
6 Summary Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS




                         4     The Department and its arm’s-length bodies did not know whether local NHS
                         organisations were prepared for a cyber attack. Local healthcare organisations such
                         as trusts and clinical commissioning groups are responsible for keeping the information
                         they hold secure, and for having arrangements in place to respond to an incident or
                         emergency, including a cyber attack. Local healthcare bodies are overseen by the
                         Department and its arm’s-length bodies. The Department and Cabinet Office wrote to
                         trusts in 2014, saying it was essential they had “robust plans” to migrate away from old
                         software, such as Windows XP, by April 2015. In March and April 2017, NHS Digital had
                         issued critical alerts warning organisations to patch their systems to prevent WannaCry.
                         However, before 12 May 2017, the Department had no formal mechanism for assessing
                         whether NHS organisations had complied with its advice and guidance. Prior to the
                         attack, NHS Digital had conducted an on-site cyber-security assessment for 88 out of
                         236 trusts, and none had passed. However, NHS Digital cannot mandate a local body
                         to take remedial action even if it has concerns about the vulnerability of an organisation
                         (paragraphs 2.5, 2.7, 2.10 to 2.12 and 3.2, and Figure 4).


                         How the WannaCry attack affected the NHS
                         5       The attack led to disruption in at least 34% of trusts in England although
                         the Department and NHS England do not know the full extent of the disruption
                         (Figure 1). On 12 May, NHS England initially identified 45 NHS organisations including
                         37 trusts that had been infected by the WannaCry ransomware (although NHS England
                         initially identified 37 trusts as being infected, three of these were mis-categorised and
                         later re-categorised as not being infected but experiencing disruption). Over the following
                         days, more organisations reported they had been affected. In total, at least 80 out of 236
                         trusts across England were affected. The trusts included:

                         •    34 infected and locked out of devices (of which, 25 were acute trusts); and

                         •    46 not infected but reporting disruption. For example, these trusts shut down their
                              email and other systems as a precaution and on their own initiative, as they had not
                              received central advice early enough on 12 May to inform their decisions on what
                              to do. This meant, for example, that they had to use pen and paper for activities
                              usually performed electronically.

                         NHS England and NHS Digital identified a further 21 trusts that were attempting to
                         contact the WannaCry domain, but were not locked out of their devices. There are two
                         possible reasons for this. Trusts may have become infected after the kill-switch had been
                         activated, and were therefore not locked out of their devices. Alternatively, they may have
                         contacted the WannaCry domain as part of their cyber-security activity.

                         A further 603 primary care and other NHS organisations were infected by WannaCry,
                         including 595 GP practices. However, the Department does not know how many NHS
                         organisations could not access records or receive information, because they shared
                         data or systems with an infected trust. NHS Digital told us that it believes no patient
                         data were compromised or stolen (paragraphs 1.2 to 1.5 and 1.9, and Figure 1).
Figure 1 shows The NHS experienced a wide range of disruption as a consequence of the WannaCry cyber attack
Figure 1 shows The NHS experienced a wide range of disruption as a consequence of the WannaCry cyber attack


Figure 1
The impact of WannaCry on the NHS
The NHS experienced a wide range of disruption as a consequence of the WannaCry cyber attack


    Known disruption                                        Hospital care                                                               Primary care and other NHS organisations


          Trusts infected and                  Trusts not infected           Trusts where systems                      GP practices infected and                  Other organisations infected and
          locked out of devices                but reporting                 were attempting to contact                locked out of devices                      locked out of devices
                                               disruption                    WannaCry domain, but not
          34                                                                                                           595                                        8
                                                                             locked out of devices
          (Including 25 acute trusts)          46
                                                                             21
                                                                                                                       GP practices and other                     GP practices and other organisations
                                                                                                                       organisations not infected but             where systems were attempting to
          Patient appointments cancelled Estimated 19,494                                                              reporting disruption                       contact WannaCry domain, but not
          Including cancelled patient operations                                                                                                                  locked out of devices
                                                                                                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                  71



    Unknown disruption
                                                                                                                       Patient appointments cancelled


          Number of NHS organisations unable to access records because they shared data or systems with an infected trust


          Number of trusts or GPs that were delayed in receiving information, such as test results, from infected trusts


          Number of patients diverted from accident and emergency departments at infected trusts to other organisations, includes patients conveyed in an ambulance



Notes
1 ‘Other organisations’ include clinical commissioning groups, commissioning support units, an NHS 111 provider, and non-NHS bodies that provide NHS care, such as a hospice,
    social enterprise and community interest companies.
2     The numbers shown are based on organisations self-reporting problems to national bodies, and NHS England and NHS Digital’s analysis of internet activity, and may be higher
      if some organisations did not report the problems they experienced in a timely or accurate way.
3     Some of the trusts identified as not infected but reporting disruption did have a small number of devices infected. However, they did not report themselves to NHS England as
      infected, and NHS England did not recategorise them as being infected after the WannaCry attack was over.
4     Some trusts, GP practices and other organisations were identified as having systems that attempted to contact the WannaCry domain, but were not locked out of their devices.
      There are two possible explanations for this: they could have become infected after the kill-switch had been activated. Or, they could have avoided infection but contacted the
      WannaCry domain as part of their cyber-security activity. NHS England does not know which organisations fall into each category.

Source: National Audit Office analysis of NHS England data
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS Summary 7
8 Summary Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS




                         6     Thousands of appointments and operations were cancelled and in five
                         areas patients had to travel further to accident and emergency departments.
                         Between 12 May and 18 May, NHS England collected some information on cancelled
                         appointments, to help it manage the incident, but this did not include all types of
                         appointment. NHS England identified 6,912 appointments had been cancelled, and
                         estimated more than 19,000 appointments would have been cancelled in total, based
                         on the normal rate of follow‑up appointments to first appointments. NHS England told
                         us it does not plan to identify the actual number because it is focusing its efforts on
                         responding appropriately to the lessons learned from WannaCry. As data were not
                         collected during the incident, neither the Department nor NHS England know how many
                         GP appointments were cancelled, or how many ambulances and patients were diverted
                         from the five accident and emergency departments that were unable to treat some
                         patients (paragraphs 1.7, 1.8 and 1.10, and Figure 1).

                         7     The Department, NHS England and the National Crime Agency told us that
                         no NHS organisation paid the ransom, but the Department does not know how
                         much the disruption to services cost the NHS. The Department, NHS England and
                         the National Crime Agency told us no NHS organisation paid the ransom. NHS Digital
                         told us it advised the trusts it spoke to not to pay the ransom, and wrote to all trusts on
                         14 May advising against the payment of ransoms. The Department does not know the
                         cost of the disruption to services. Costs include: cancelled appointments; additional IT
                         support provided by local NHS bodies, or IT consultants; or the cost of restoring data and
                         systems affected by the attack. National and local NHS staff worked overtime including
                         over the weekend of 13-14 May to resolve problems and to prevent a fresh wave of
                         organisations being affected by WannaCry on Monday 15 May (paragraphs 1.11 and 1.12).

                         8     The cyber attack could have caused more disruption if it had not been
                         stopped by a cyber researcher activating a ‘kill-switch’. On the evening of 12 May
                         a cyber-security researcher activated a ‘kill-switch’ so that WannaCry stopped locking
                         devices. This meant that some NHS organisations had been infected by the WannaCry
                         ransomware, but because of the researcher’s actions, they were not locked out of
                         their devices and systems. Between 15 May and mid-September NHS Digital and
                         NHS England identified a further 92 organisations, including 21 trusts, as contacting
                         the WannaCry domain, although some of these may have been contacting the
                         domain as part of their cyber-security activity. Of the 34 trusts infected and locked
                         out of devices, 29 were located in the North NHS region and the Midlands and East
                         NHS region. NHS England believes more organisations were infected in these regions
                         because they were hit early on 12 May before the WannaCry ‘kill-switch’ was activated
                         (paragraphs 1.14 and 2.2, and Figure 3).
                              Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS Summary 9




The NHS response to the attack
9     The Department had developed a plan, which included roles and
responsibilities of national and local organisations for responding to an attack,
but had not tested the plan at a local level. This meant the NHS was not clear what
actions it should take when affected by WannaCry. NHS England found that responding
to WannaCry was different from dealing with other incidents, such as a major transport
accident. Because WannaCry was different it took more time to determine the cause
of the problem, the scale of the problem and the number of organisations and people
affected (paragraph 3.3 and Figure 2).

10 As the NHS had not rehearsed for a national cyber attack it was not
immediately clear who should lead the response and there were problems with
communications. The WannaCry attack began on the morning of 12 May. At 4 pm
NHS England declared the cyber attack a major incident and at 6:45 pm initiated
its existing Emergency, Preparedness, Resilience and Response plans to act as the
single point of coordination for incident management, with support from NHS Digital
and NHS Improvement. In the absence of clear guidelines on responding to a national
cyber attack, local organisations reported the attack to different organisations within
and outside the health sector, including local police. Communication was difficult in
the early stages of the attack as many local organisations could not communicate with
national NHS bodies by email as they had been infected by WannaCry or had shut down
their email systems as a precaution, although NHS Improvement did communicate
with trusts’ chief executive officers by telephone. Locally, NHS staff shared information
through personal mobile devices, including using the encrypted WhatsApp application.
Although not an official communication channel, national bodies and trusts told us it
worked well during this incident (paragraphs 3.3 to 3.5 and Figure 2).

11 In line with its existing procedures for managing a major incident, NHS
England initially focused on maintaining emergency care. Since the attack occurred
on a Friday this caused minimal disruption to primary care services, which tend to be closed
over the weekend. Twenty of the 25 infected acute trusts managed to continue treating
urgent and emergency patients throughout the weekend. However, five – in London, Essex,
Hertfordshire, Hampshire and Cumbria – had to divert patients to other accident and
emergency departments, and a further two needed outside help to continue treating
patients. By 16 May only two hospitals were still diverting patients. The recovery was
helped by the work of the cyber-security researcher that stopped WannaCry spreading
(paragraphs 1.7, 1.13 and 1.14).
10 Summary Investigation: WannaCry cyber attack and the NHS




                         Lessons learned
                         12 NHS Digital told us that all organisations infected by WannaCry shared
                         the same vulnerability and could have taken relatively simple action to protect
                         themselves. All NHS organisations infected by WannaCry had unpatched or
                         unsupported Windows operating systems so were susceptible to the ransomware.
                         However, whether organisations had patched their systems or not, taking action
                         to manage their firewalls facing the internet would have guarded organisations
                         against infection. NHS Digital told us that the majority of NHS devices infected were
                         unpatched but on supported Microsoft Windows 7 operating systems. Unsupported
                         devices (those on XP) were in the minority of identified issues. NHS Digital has also
                         confirmed that the ransomware spread via the internet, including through the N3
                         network (the broadband network connecting all NHS sites in England), but that there
                         were no instances of the ransomware spreading via NHSmail (the NHS email system)
                         (paragraphs 1.2, 1.6 and 2.4 to 2.6).

                         13 There was no clear relationship between vulnerability to the WannaCry
                         attack and leadership in trusts. We found no clear relationship between trusts
                         infected by WannaCry and the quality of their leadership, as rated by the Care Quality
                         Commission (paragraph 2.8).

                         14 The NHS has accepted that there are lessons to learn from WannaCry and
                         is taking action. Lessons identified by the Department and NHS national bodies
                         include the need to:

                         •    develop a response plan setting out what the NHS should do in the event
                              of a cyber attack and establish the roles and responsibilities of local and
                              national NHS bodies and the Department;

                         •    ensure organisations implement critical CareCERT alerts (emails sent by
                              NHS Digital providing information or requiring action), including applying
                              software patches and keeping anti-virus software up to date;

                         •    ensure essential communications are getting through during an attack
                              when systems are down; and

                         •    ensure that organisations, boards and their staff are taking the cyber threat
                              seriously, understand the direct risks to front-line services and are working
                              proactively to maximise their resilience and minimise impacts on patient care.

                         Since WannaCry, NHS England and NHS Improvement have written to every trust,
                         clinical commissioning group and commissioning support unit asking boards to
                         ensure that they have implemented all 39 CareCERT alerts issued by NHS Digital
                         between March and May 2017 and taken essential action to secure local firewalls
                         (paragraphs 3.8 and 3.9).
